Discussion 
1. Sex differences in MLH1 count

To find the origin of conserved features of typical landscape (in heterochasimy ) – look to conserved features of gametogenesis 

(many anisogamouse have identical gametes (only mating types which are defined genetically – at limited genetic loci) – development of gametes is virtually identical

However in dioecious species – the gametes diverge – two prominent features that distinguish the (development // cellular aspects of male and female gametes are 

1.  asymetrical division (final gamete size is closely connected to this (direction of the causation not clear)

2.  spindle structure (refs) having or not having a centromsome (which concentrates MT ends at a point)

(there are strange exceptions (that one paper)  also (these two features are also connected)

asymmetrical division
1 final bigg haploid cell instead of 4 equal (small haploid cells)
orientation of spindle, in (egg) vs out cortical (polar body)
requirement of true meiotic drive (Akira / Lampson)

spindle str
(uniparental inheritance of spindle – means that Metaphase I in eggs is difuse – and futher separation paused until the sperm brings in more centrosome material? (is this right?)

differences between centrosome and acentrosome spindle --centrosome nucleate MT (fibers, concentrates them)
CONSEQUENECES – on the SAC 
The uniparental inheritance of centrosome – is a way to 'combate / suppress' parthenogenesis ---uniparental inheritance of centromere evolved, because multiple centrosomes can really mess up the division.   ( the barrier to parthenogenesis is not having a centromsome)

these influence – lead back to SAC (major check point) // quality control for segregation (one of the main selective forces on CO number and placement (at the chromosome level 

Is SAC more affected by cell volume (diffusion of signal) or by spindle?  (









these results – is unique one (of of the best looks at heterochiasmy patterns in short evolutionary scales – and levels (genome wide rate and bivalent landscape)

 the genome wide rate is not a conserved feature of of heterochiasmy

(4 traits distinguish recombination in male and females):

-1. (general CO position / typical landscape)  heterochiasmy (male biasesd / female biased)  while female biased is (the canonical  pattern)  – many male biased and equal examples.

-we proposed that (as noted in sardell) --- the typical landscape is the most conserved feature of heterochiasmy, we see it across all strains regardless of the direction of heterochiasmy (this is also seen in cattle and same rate strains)

more specific to our data / mice / mammals
features / traits / patterns we consistently see across sexes in this dataset..

2. SC compaction differences also seem to be conserved features (for mammals –(birds are exceptions).  Longer SC length  (less dense CO placement / number)

3.  weaker interference in females (normalized)   The physical units of interference in SC seems consistent between sexes.  (are the sc compaction and weaker interference connected??) (stronger interference in female cattle)

4. more within mouse variance!  (seen in humans Lynn / Koehler et al – other species?)


What models fit with these features evolving (with in a heterochiasmy system?)
What models would be able to make predictions for all four of these features?

INDIRECT (most all are base on modifier models – so they examine just the total genome wide rate)

-SACE:  
	typical landscape : yes
	SC compaction
	weaker interference: 
	within mouse variation (checkpoint control?)

gamete selection: (reduction principle)
	typical landscape:
	SC compaction:
	interference:
	within mouse variance:





DIRECT

spindle / segregation / selection at metaphase
bad / relaxed SAC in females / strong SAC in males
	typical landscape  (YES)
	SC compaction  (?)
	interference   (YES – the Female spindle doesn't care about number and placement)
	within mouse variance (Yes relaxed selection)


consequence of the sex differences
(Veller rbar)
more shuffling in females 

(expanding on the metaphase sex differences)...

SACE and metaphase / spindle based theories are best candidates – we can't distinguish – test between the two – prove one over the other

future ideas – caveats
	-no data on spermatocyte spindle 



2. BIG DIFFERENCEs between males

the main focus was on the difference between males – 

A. DSBs!! (plus moderate support for SC length differences


B.  INTERFERENCE (neat wht's up with this?


 
